In the Kernels section, we
fixed a bug caused by splitting
threads into blocks.
It's only natural to ask, why have
all this complexity with thread
hierarchy in the first place?
To find out, let's modify our
problem a bit to see where thread
blocks truly make a difference.
Let's now create a histogram
for the temperatures that
our simulator produces.
A histogram helps us see
how frequently certain
temperature ranges occur.
So let's quickly
review how it works.
First, we divide the entire
temperature range into bins,
each covering the same span,
in our case, 10 degrees.
For each cell in the simulation,
we determine which bin its
temperature falls into.
A simple way to do this is
to divide the temperature
by the bin width and round down.
For example, if a cell's
temperature is four degrees,
we divide 10 and get zero,
which corresponds to the first bin.
If a cell's temperature is
15 degrees, dividing by 10
gives us 1, meaning it goes
into the second bin.
Once we've assigned each cell
to the correct bin, we count
how many cells landed in each bin.
That count becomes the height
of the bar in the histogram.
In our example, eight cells
fall into the first bin and
four cells into the second bin.
This final visual makes it
easy to spot patterns and
see which temperature ranges
are most common in the simulation.
Let's begin by writing our
kernel signature.
Since our histogram only
needs one dimension, MD-SPAN
would be an overkill.
Instead, we can use SPAN,
which is essentially a
one-dimensional MD-SPAN.
In CUDA, just like in C++,
SPAN is preferred over raw
pointers because it's safer,
helps prevent common pointer
errors while remaining lightweight.
To construct a SPAN, it's
sufficient to pass a raw
pointer and a size.
Then we can use square brackets
to access underlying elements.
Span also provides a size member
function which returns the total
number of elements in the span.
With both the temperature
and histogram passed into
our kernel, we'll use the
already familiar thread index
computation scheme to assign
exactly one cell per each thread.
Next each thread loads its
corresponding temperature value
and divides it by the bin width
to find the the correct bin index.
In a production environment, you'd
also want to ensure that this
memory access is within bounds.
For simplicity, we'll skip
the boundary check and rely
on problem sizes that are multiples
of the block size instead.
Next, each thread reads the
current count from its assigned
bin, increments that value, and
writes it back to the histogram.
But it looks like
something went wrong.
We have around four million
cells in the grid, so we'd
expect the histogram bars
to sum to four million.
But the histogram looks empty.
What happened?
The issue is that our kernel has
a data race in the highlighted
lines of the code.
All those millions of threads
are reading and writing the
same memory location.
Let's break this down.
Say we have only two threads.
They start by issuing a
memory read request.
Let's say memory read from the
first thread arrives first.
Then memory responds with
the current value stored in
the histogram, which is zero.
Now, old counter stores zero.
Then, first thread increments
0, new value stores 1.
All while the second thread
starts reading zero from memory.
Now, second threads local
variables store zero as well.
Second thread then increments its
local counter while first thread
starts writing new value in memory.
This write overwrites previous
value in the histogram,
which now stores 1.
But the second thread
is doing the same.
So, in our kernel, we lose
most of the increments.
Now imagine this happening
with millions of threads,
and it should make it clear why
our final histogram appeared empty.
We simply lost most of the
counters because of this data race.
To fix this race, we need to
ensure the read, modify, write
sequence is treated as a single,
indivisible memory operation.
In C++, these operations are
known as atomics.
You can think of an atomic
as storing the instruction
itself, rather than just bytes.
In the example on the right,
we store plus one into memory,
and when that operation arrives
on memory, it reads the current
value, increments it, and
writes back the result in one
step, preventing any other thread
from interfering in the meantime.
CUDA provides a type called
CUDA std atomic ref.
Which lets you treat any
existing memory location
as an atomic variable.
Here we create an atomic reference
to count zero by wrapping
it into AtomicRef.
Which then provides us with
various atomic functions available
on this reference.
For instance, we can atomically
add or subtract a value from
this memory location.
And each of these operations
appear as a single indivisible
step to all threads.
Let's see how this type can
help fix our kernel.
Now both threads issue
atomic increment.
First threads fetch,
add arrives first.
The question mark in the atomic
operation is replaced with
the current value of the bin.
Then it adds one and stores
the result back into memory.
Now our histogram stores one.
The second thread's atomic
increment arrives second.
And now its question mark
is replaced with the current
value of the histogram, which
ends up being one.
Now we add 1 to 1 and store
2 back into memory.
And as you can see, the memory
now stores the current result
and no increment is lost.
In the section exercise, you'll
have to fix the data race
in the histogram kernel by
using atomic references.